it's well known around the world that
Africa is by far the poorest continent
in the world by just about every kind of
metric you want to measure by if you
want to look at countries by their
nominal GDP per capita a whopping 24 out
of the bottom 30 of them worldwide are
all located in Africa if you want to
look at countries by their human
development index score a full 27 out of
the bottom 30 of them worldwide are also
all located in Africa Africa is the
least urbanized of all the world's
inhabited continents and is the only
continent where a majority of people
continue to live in rural communities
out sight of cities only 43% of Africa's
population in 2024 live within cities
compared to 53% in Asia 74% in Europe
81% in Latin America and the Caribbean
and 82% in North America people born in
subsaharan Africa today are expected to
live shorter lives than anywhere else in
the world with the life expectancy as
recently as 2022 of only about 60 years
from birth multiple decades shorter
lives than people born across Asia
Europe and the Americas are expected to
enjoy and if it isn't the continent's
crippling poverty that is the most
well-known fact about it in the western
world it's the frequent Wars and
conflicts that have been continually
fought across Africa for decades now
with no less than five conflicts fought
across the continent since the 1960s
that each killed more than a million
people and more than a dozen others that
killed hundreds of thousands of people
and all of Africa's poverty and conflict
is despite the fact that Africa is
perhaps the richest continent in the
world in terms of Natural Resources
especially mineral resources
nearly half of all the gold ever mined
throughout all of human history has come
from Africa and about a fifth of global
gold production today continues to take
place there Africa has the largest known
reserves in the world of diamonds and
platinum in addition a phosphate Rock
that's vital for fertilizers Cobalt
that's vital for battery production and
boite that is vital for aluminum
production in addition to some of the
world's largest reserves of copper
uranium oil and natural gas as well and
a whole bunch of other resources the
Democratic Republic of the Congo alone
Africa's second largest country also
called the DRC has been estimated to
have recoverable mineral resources worth
around $24 trillion within its borders
at 2023 market prices and yet the drc's
entire GDP in 2023 was only a little
more than $66 billion meaning that the
resources present in the country are
worth more than 360 times the country's
current total annual economic output
Africa's modern poverty is despite this
abundance of resource wealth and also
despite the fact that Humanity as a
species originated in Africa in the
first place which should have in theory
given African peoples a generous Head
Start of tens of thousands of years over
their cousins who migrated Out of Africa
and settled in other continents it's not
a situation that you might really expect
at first and throughout the past Century
there have been many many theories
proposed and put forward to attempt and
explain all of this some that have been
proposed honest ly and some more pseudo
scientific and racist that do not Merit
any further analysis the truth is there
isn't one single explanation that will
easily answer why Africa is so poor
today there were numerous maybe even
countless explanations behind it that
ranged from the lasting negative effects
of colonialism and the slave trade that
were wrought on the continent to the
continued neocolonial exploitation of
many African countries into the present
to the rampant corruption that has been
endemic in many African societies since
the end of the colonial era African is
an enormous and extremely diverse and
Rich place with a huge amount of History
it is not a single giant monolith and
attempting to explain the entire
continent's poverty through just a
single lens or from just a single
perspective will never satisfactorily
give the entire picture and trying to
give you that whole picture to fully
explain Africa's poverty would fill up
volumes of books and thousands of pages
any attempt to explain Africa's current
poverty in any shorter context such as
this video will inherently be an over
simplification and leave a lot of
context and Nuance out for the sake of
time nonetheless in this video I will be
specifically looking at how the
geography of the African continent in my
opinion has severely handicapped and
held the continent's peoples back for
Generations throughout its entire
history from the ancient past right up
through the present day and why
geography has therefore been a major
contributor to Africa's chronic poverty
that exists
today first of all it's important for
you to understand how truly utterly
massive a place that Africa really is
you could fit no less than three United
States including Alaska within the
African continent in fact you could cram
in the United States China India
Greenland the UK France Germany Spain
and most of Eastern Europe all into
Africa and still have room left over
because of this huge size the distances
involved across the African continent
are far greater than most people assume
you will notice that unlike Eurasia
Africa stretches far longer from the
north to the South than it does from the
East to the West the distance from the
northern tip of Africa down to the
southern tip is roughly 8,000 km about
the same distance away as Portugal is
from Nepal now because of Africa's
length and its location on the Earth's
surface it is also very notably the only
one of earthe continents that straddles
the Tropic of Cancer the equator and the
Tropic of Capricorn meaning that it is
the only one of earthe continents that
extends fully throughout the entire
tropical Zone the climates that are
found throughout AA afca vary
significantly when you travel from north
to south across large distances but they
vary much less from west to east across
much shorter distances from north to
south you will go from a Mediterranean
climate to a desert climate to a
semi-arid climate to a grassland climate
to a rainforest climate back to a
grassland climate back to a semi-arid
climate before finally returning back to
a narrow Mediterranean climate again in
the very far south these climatic shifts
across the continent from north to south
are significantly more extreme and
variable in smaller distances than the
shifts you will find in other continents
like in EUR Asia which stretches more
wide west to east than it does tall
north to south as a result Eurasian
climate zones are significantly larger
and more contiguous than they are in
Africa where the climate zones are
smaller and more fragmented and
splintered moreover Africa has
substantially larger amounts of desert
semiarid and jungle type climates in
environments than seen in places like
Eurasia where Agriculture and livestock
hering is substantially more difficult
to perform the Sahara desert in
particular is the world's largest hot
desert and its location and size has
served to isolate the rest of the
continent beneath it from the rest of
the world for thousands of years now a
region of the continent known as
subsaharan Africa the Sahara is an
absolutely massive and extremely
inhospitable Place coming in at roughly
the same size as the entirety of the
United States stretching all the way
clear across the continent from west to
east the presence of the Sahara
effectively functions as an unlivable
difficult to Traverse over ocean of sand
that separates all of the land south of
it from the rest of the land in the old
world it makes subsaharan Africa
effectively an island or a completely
separate continent entirely and so
across generations of history as Traders
ideas technology and culture traveled
across Eurasia and North Africa from
west to east and from east to west they
generally struggle to penetrate through
the nearly 2,000 km worth of barren
Sahara Desert from all of the lands
below and even to day in the 21st
century crossing the Sahara by land is
still no easy feat with only a handful
of highways that cross it and not a
single Railway that connects it from
North to South leaving camels is one of
the most efficient methods of crossing
the Sahara even still today most people
are already pretty familiar with how big
of a barrier the Sahara desert really is
in Africa but the Sahara is in truth
only the very beginning of how geography
has isolated subsaharan Africa from the
rest of the world for Generations one of
the other most peculiar things about the
African continent besides for being
owned to the world's largest hot desert
is how incredibly smooth the continent's
coastlines are literally all around it
no matter where you go throughout
Africa's coastlines in the north the
West the South or the East you'll
largely find plenty of smooth coasts and
beautiful beaches but you'll struggle to
find any good or even any decent natural
Harbors to protect ships and conduct
trade at this is most reflected When
comparing the lengths of the African
Coastline to the lengths of other
Continental coastlines for example
despite Africa being nearly four times
larger than Europe is in terms of
overall area the coastline in Europe is
about six times longer than the
coastline in Africa is because of this
Europe's significantly more Jagged and
longer Coastline contain substantially
more inlets and usable natural ports and
harbors that are available in Africa to
put it into even more of an insane
perspective keep keep in mind that the
Chesapeake Bay in the United States a
huge area of enclosed Waters that
includes access to cities like
Washington DC Baltimore and noral
encompasses a coastline length all on
its own that's equivalent to more than
60% the entire Coastline of the whole
African continent because of this
smoothness of the African continent's
coastlines there is a severe shortage of
usable natural Harbors to use for
protecting ships from the roughness of
the Open Sea which has handicapped the
ability of Africans to conduct Maritime
trade and project Naval power for all of
human history and if that wasn't enough
a substantial portion of subsaharan
Africa also has very shallow Coastal
Waters as well which prevent large ships
from being able to approach these
shallow coasts without grounding
themselves this forces large Merchant
ships to conduct trade with large
amounts of the subsaharan African
Coastline through the timec consuming
and expensive way of anchoring offshore
and then transporting cargo to R and
from the coast with smaller vessels that
can navigate through the shallower
waters without grounding themselves
historically as Arab explorers and
Traders in the Middle Ages began
navigating from Arabia down the east
coast of Africa they didn't encounter a
good natural and defensible harbor to Ed
as a trade Outpost along Africa's smooth
and shallow coastlines until they
encountered the island of UA only about
35 kilometers off of the African
Mainland it was there on that island at
the sight of a rare sheltered Harbor in
Africa where the Arabs established a
strategic Trade Post that gradually
evolved into the city of Zanzibar a port
based around a natural Harbor that could
facilitate trade and contact between the
mainland Swahili coast and the Arab
world that made Zanzibar one of the
largest and wealthiest cities in all of
Africa for
centuries but the smoothness of Africa's
coastlines and the lack of very many
good natural Harbors presents the
continent with a problem to trade that
is only exacerbated by the fact that
virtually none of Africa's rivers are
actually navigable out to the ocean
eliminating their ability to facilitate
Maritime riverine trade between the
interior of Africa and the global market
across the oceans to understand why this
is largely the case you have to
understand the unique nature of Africa's
elevation first virtually everywhere on
the continent outside of Western Africa
the interior will jut up rapidly from
the coast which forms a series of
escarpments throughout the rest of the
continent all throughout the majority of
Africa these High escarpments create a
series of very narrow coastal plains
that are often no more than only a few
dozen kilometers wide that are backed up
by steep Rises and elevation behind them
creating very small coastal hinder lands
where even in locations with a few good
natural Harbors they're still just
connected to these narrow Coastal hinder
lands that offer little space for
civilization building and trade compare
this again to Europe where natural
Harbors at Venice and Trieste are
directly connected to the large
low-lying po valley and where natural
Harbors all along the North Coast of
Europe from ANP to roddam to Hamburg to
gdin are all directly connected to the
great European plane and because most of
the interior of Africa is covered by
these high plateaus nearly the entire
continent is more than 300 M or 1,000 ft
above sea level and about half of the
continent is more than 760 M or 2500 ft
above sea level and the way that the
elevation rapidly descends down to sea
level that takes place near the coasts
the rivers of Africa that begin in the
interior have to plunge down these great
elevations in order to reach the sea
which turns nearly all of Africa's
Rivers into torents full of cascading
Rapids and waterfalls as they approach
the coast which prevents them from being
able to be used by Traders in their
ships as Maritime highways that are used
on every other one of Earth's inhabited
continents the Congo River for example
is the second longest river on the
African continent and the ninth longest
river in the entire world and yet across
a stretch of 350 km as the river
approaches the Atlantic it plunges down
more than 270 m in elevation which has
created nothing less than the largest
most powerful and most dangerous series
of Rapids in the entire world as all of
that water in the Congo River crashes
down which creates an impassible barri
that blocks Traders from the interior of
the Congo from using the river to
transport Goods cheaply out to the ocean
for global trade for the sake of
comparison during the final 800 km of
the Amazon River's course towards its
mouth on the Atlantic the river drops an
elevation by only about 6 M compared to
the Congo River's plunge of 270 M during
just the final 350 km an absolutely
enormous difference
and the Congo River is far from unique
in Africa of being unusable for
facilitating direct Oceanic trade with
the outside world the third longest
river on the continent the Niger
originates only about 320 km away from
the ocean in Western Africa but it then
arcs deep into the interior of the
continent before finally turning back
again towards the sea and stretches out
for nearly
4,200 km before it finally reaches the
sea because the elevation in West Africa
is lower over larger distances than
anywhere else on the continent the Niger
is generally regarded as the most
navigable river in subsaharan Africa as
about 34s of its total length is
theoretically usable by some kind of
commercial shipping the length of the
River from its mouth in Nigeria towards
the city of onicha about 200 km deep
into the interior is fully navigable
throughout the entire year but from
there any further Upstream navigability
is dependent on the season and on the
rainfall during the dry season in this
part of the world between about November
and early summer the niger's water
levels will plummet to as low is only 4
M deep in some parts and navigability
becomes extremely impaired in sections
larger vessels won't be able to continue
from onicha Upstream towards loosa
between February and March and they
won't be able to continue any further
Upstream towards jebba until as late as
May or even June before the wet season
starts again in July effectively this
makes the advantage of of large scale
Maritime usage of the Niger River
largely restricted only to modern-day
Nigeria and even then it is only
seasonally useful anywhere deeper than
about 200 km into the interior and
that's considered the best River for
maritime trade anywhere in subsaharan
Africa all of the others have the same
problems as the Congo River has and have
a series of Rapids or waterfalls nearby
to the coast that blocks them from being
able to be utilized for trade between
the interior of the continent and the
sea as a result there is not a single
River throughout all of subsaharan
Africa that is actually navigable out to
the Sea throughout the entire year which
is an enormous handicap for the
continent in its ability to actually
conduct international trade and to
actually generate Capital compare the
river systems of subsaharan Africa that
are largely useless for direct Maritime
trade with the sea with the river
systems in Europe Asia and in the
Americas in Europe rivers like the Ry
and the danu are naturally navigable
from the sea for hundreds to even
thousands of kilometers deep into the
continent's interior in China the yank
sea river is also fully navigable from
the ocean for thousands of kilometers
deep into the interior and in North
America the vast web of interconnected
rivers and tributaries in the
Mississippi Basin offer up the largest
network of navigable waterways in the
entire world that are all easily
connected to the global ocean through
New Orleans subsaharan Africa meanwhile
in extremely sharp contrast to all of
these other places has never had the
same built-in Geographic advantage in
using rivers to connect its interior
with the outside world through trade the
sole exception on the entire continent
of Africa is the Nile River but even the
Nile naturally ceased being navigable
any further into the African interior
than modern-day cartoon and Sudan the
location where the Blue Nile and White
Nile stems converge that creates a
series of Rapids elimin the use of the
Nile for navigability out to the sea to
the peoples of subsaharan Africa and
reserving the river's navigability out
to the Sea only for the peoples north of
cartoom which of course became the
Cradle of the powerful Egyptian
civilization the frustrating thing is
also that most of Africa's Rivers
actually have large sections within
their interiors that are actually very
navigable but because none of them are
fully navigable all the way out to the
Sea African merchants in the continent's
interior have been forced to
painstakingly load their caros up onto
Riverbats sail them through the actually
navigable parts of those Rivers cheaply
and quickly and then unload them for
time consuming an expensive landbased
Transportation around all of the various
unnavigable parts in comparison to
European Asian and American Merchants
who have been able to continually ship
heavy products from deep within their
Interiors for trade on riverboats
directly to the ocean for centuries
allowing them to reduce their
transportation costs and retain more
capital in comparison to African
Merchants who have never been this
geographically fortunate especially when
you combine the lack of Africa's
navigable rivers with the lack of
Africa's usable Harbors on the coastline
and the Sahara Desert that essentially
makes subsaharan Africa a fully separate
continent that is also the most
challenging continent in the world to
actually conduct trade with because of
their lack of practically any good
Harbors or navigable rivers that
penetrate substantially deep enough into
the interior this is also why
historically African peoples and
civilizations without navigable rivers
to the sea or usable harbers never
really became seafaring peoples compared
to their peers that emerged elsewhere in
Europe Asia Oceania and North America
who all actually had all of those
Geographic advantages this can be most
clearly observed by the fact that a very
large amount of islands around the
African Mainland were initially settled
and colonized by non-african peoples
with the most notable and EXT extreme
example being the huge island of
Madagascar which rather than Africans
from the mainland was initially settled
and colonized in large numbers of people
by The austronesians Who sailed to it
all the way across the entire Indian
Ocean from modern-day Indonesia probably
beginning around the 6th Century CE
which is why the malagi language of
Madagascar spoken today is an
austronesian language whose closest
living relative is the Maan language
spoken more than 7,000 k away over on
the island of Borneo rather than any
languages spoken in Mainland Africa only
about 400 km away and Beyond Madagascar
huge numbers of islands all around the
African Mainland were initially
discovered and settled by Europeans
rather than Africans during the European
age of Discovery from adira to Cabo
Verde to sa to and Principe to Maisha s
runion moreover the large amount of
Africa beneath the Sahara Desert within
the tropical Zone has enabled for the
proliferation of tropical diseases
throughout the majority of subsaharan
Africa that further handicap the
continent's ability for Progress many of
the world's deadliest tropical diseases
are believed to have originated in
subsaharan Africa including mosquito
born diseases like chicken gunia Denay
yellow fever zika and most notoriously
of all malaria malaria is such a deadly
disease that it has been estimated by
researchers from the Liverpool School of
tropical medicine to have killed as many
as one in 20 of all all human beings who
have ever lived throughout our entire
history around 600,000 people continue
to die from malaria every single year
even today in the 2020s and around 90%
of all of those deaths from malaria have
been concentrated exclusively in
subsaharan Africa so tragically While
most of subsaharan Africa is elevated
just high enough to the
continent's rivers for navigability and
to make even landbased Transportation
difficult over the rugged terrain it's
not elev ated high enough to lift most
of the continent outside of the tropical
Zone where mosquitoes and their diseases
are able to run rampant and even more
tragically even in the areas of
subsaharan Africa south of the tropical
Zone that are elevated high enough to
keep the mosquitoes out they have been
handicapped by devastating non-tropical
diseases in recent times like HIV anyway
HIV was likely first spread from
chimpanzees to humans sometime in the
1920s in modern day kinasa the capital
of the RC in central Africa since then
HIV has spread most rapidly across the
southern third of the African continent
and has been particularly devastating in
the highly elevated areas south of the
tropics that have largely been spared
from the historical mosquito born
tropical diseases like malaria on the
continent in eswatini laoso batswana and
Zimbabwe more than 20% of their
populations are HIV positive today while
in South Africa Namibia mosm Beek Zambia
and Malawi more than 10% of the
population are infected with HIV further
restricting life expectancies in these
countries and holding their economies
back even further in addition to all of
their other inherent disadvantages thus
there is today no area of subsaharan
Africa that is not devastated by African
born diseases whether tropical diseases
throughout the tropical environment of
Africa or HIV throughout the
non-tropical southern areas of the
continent to then make matters even
worse the burdens of mosquito born
tropical diseases that affect humans in
Africa like malaria and yellow fever are
exacerbated by the disease carrying TIY
fly as well which affects both humans
and Liv stock alike the range of the TIY
fly extends throughout the tropical
region of Africa south of the Sahel and
the mountainous Highlands of Ethiopia
when the tly bites an animal it spreads
a parasitic disease through their blood
known as
trypanosomiasis which results in the
animal growing a fever and becoming
lethargic and in many cases if left
untreated results in the animal's death
throughout the area of tropical Africa
within the TIY flies range they've
effectively handicapped the use of
domesticated animals throughout all of
history by simply killing them which has
historically eliminated the widescale
use of animals for transportation like
horses and camels and eliminated beasts
of Burden for agriculture like oxen or
donkeys for pulling plows by crippling
the potential of livestock and beasts of
Burden throughout this region the TIY
flight made it significantly more
challenging for Capital intensive AG
agriculture to emerge in subsaharan
Africa since the people had to rely
almost entirely on human Manpower itself
as opposed to the civilizations that
arose elsewhere all around the world who
didn't have to deal with the TIY fly and
so had plenty of pack animals to assist
with Agriculture and land transportation
without the use of animals to assist
with land transportation and denied many
navigable waterways on top of that many
African societies were forced into the
much more inefficient method of Simply
carrying baskets or bundles on their
heads and simply walking to transport
goods from one place to another a
significantly more time consuming and
expensive process a study conducted
across 2017 by epidemiologists from the
University of Edinburgh and the
University of Hong Kong concluded that
the prevalence of the TIY fly throughout
tropical Africa undermined the ability
for African peoples in these areas to
develop complex institutions and trade
relationships the study argued that
denied the use of animals for
agriculture and transportation the
societies that arose throughout here
were more likely to resort to hunting
and Gathering and to remain divided in
smaller groups which solidified and
perpetuated more narrow ethnic
identities in these regions and
contributed even more to subsaharan
Africa's High degree of ethnic
fragmentation moreover in addition to
the agricultural problems throughout
Africa presented by the prevalence of
the TIY fly there's also just the fact
that Africa doesn't really have very
much arable land that's actually
suitable for agriculture in the first
place especially not in relation to its
overall size all of the available arable
land throughout the whole of subsaharan
Africa is comparable to the arable land
found just within the United States
alone and the arable land found
throughout subsaharan Africa is
significantly more fragmented and
separated than the gigantic patches of
contiguous arable land found throughout
North America or even in Eurasia and
South America as well Eurasia has huge
continuous stretches of Arab land all
throughout Europe Russia India and China
South America has huge continuous
stretches of arable land throughout the
Rio de La Plata region and North America
has a huge patch of continuous arable
land throughout the Mississippi Basin
that is also overlapped by all of the
navigable rivers of the Mississippi
towards the sea meanwhile not only is
Africa's arable land not continuous and
significantly more fragmented than on
any other inhabited continent but much
of the continent's arable land is
enveloped within the range of the TIY
flly that undermines their usability by
denying the use of beasts of burden and
to even further this land's
usability none of the rivers from any of
these pockets of arable land can be used
to cheaply transport produce out to the
World Market since none of them are
fully navigable out to the Sea
throughout the whole year and since none
of the navigable sections of the rivers
really connect with one another in the
same ways that they do in Europe or in
North America trading agricultural
products by river even throughout much
of the interior of the continent is
extremely difficult as well the end
result of all of these compounding
problems in subsaharan Africa from the
lack of very many usable natural Harbors
along the smooth Coastline to the lack
of really any navigable Rivers out to
the sea to the commonly shallow
coastlines that prevent larger ships
from approaching to the sharp rises in
elevation almost immediately from the
coastlines that make developing
infrastructure into the interior
challenging to the a rugged terrain that
makes traveling by land difficult to the
prevalence of numerous tropical diseases
that undermines the potential of both
Manpower and animal power and which
cripples land-based animal
transportation it's no wonder that the
almost countless barriers towards
conducting trade with subsaharan Africa
has made the cost of transportation for
any Goods outside of Africa the most
expensive to Bear of any of Earth's
inhabited continents because of
subsaharan Africa's many barriers to
trade that Mak shipping and transporting
things just significantly more timec
consuming and expensive than from
literally anywhere else the only
products from Africa that have
historically been worth paying the high
Transportation cost for getting them out
of the continent have been the few
products with a very high value relative
to their size or weight such as minerals
like gold diamonds and platinum Ivory
and most infamously historically slaves
which have all rought their own
longlasting negative economic effects on
the continent it for hundreds of years
that continue well into the present day
one of the other results of Africa's
Geographic disadvantages relative to
other continents in terms of all the
numerous barriers to transportation and
trade is that the continent's fractured
geography and climates have produced an
enormously fractured Mosaic of cultures
languages and ethnic identities all
across the continent as well Europe for
example with all of its harbors and
interconnecting navigable rivers and
ease of transportation across numerous
flat planes of assisted with the help of
pack animals is a continent that is
largely dominated by just a single
language family today the Indo European
family and even more specifically by
just three branches of the Indo European
family the romance Latin languages the
Germanic languages and the Slavic
languages Africa's much much more
fractured geography meanwhile produced a
significantly more complex Mosaic of
languages across the continent to the
point where Africa is divided between at
least seven different primary language
amilies today in comparison to Europe's
one dominant language family it has
usually been estimated that somewhere
between
1,250 and 2100 different languages are
spoken across the African continent
today and some counts put the number at
more than 3,000 different languages
outside of Papua New Guinea subsaharan
Africa is the most linguistically
diverse place in the world for the sake
of comparison there's only around 250
languages that are indigenous to Europe
today while the country of Nigeria IA
alone a single country in Africa is
believed to be home to more than 500
different languages double the number of
languages found throughout the entire
European continent as a result
communication and common identity
between different peoples throughout
subsaharan Africa has been significantly
more challenging to establish throughout
history than it has been on other
continents which further reduced the
odds of large complex Empire spanning
civilizations from emerging on the
continent there are Loc Asians in the
continent where such complex
civilizations did arise but they
generally did so in the few parts of
Africa where the geographic handicaps
were fewer and less concentrated such as
the s High Empire in West Africa that
was largely beyond the reach of the TIY
flly and Encompass the generally more
navigable Niger River system or the
Ethiopian Empire that emerged in the
Ethiopian Highlands where the elevation
is high enough to lift the area outside
of the tropical climate beyond the reach
of disease carrying insects like the TIY
fly many of us are familiar with the
many lasting negative effects of
European colonialism in Africa and the
political borders imposed by the
Europeans across the continent The
Divided ethnicities and linguistic
groups across artificial borders and
pitted multiple different competing
ethnicities and linguistic groups within
the same new artificial countries to go
into depth here in how the political
geography of Africa has further handicap
the continent would be an entirely
separate video in its own right but Les
talked about in this context is also the
fact that Europe's Colonial border
drawing across Africa resulted in the
establishment of no less than 16
completely landlocked countries emerging
on the continent in the postc colonial
era a higher number of landlock
countries than exist on any other
continent in the world including in Asia
a continent that is much bigger than
Africa and yet contains fewer landlocked
States within it landlocked countries
generally struggle to generate excess
capital and wealth because they are
denied any direct access to the by way
of a coastline and so conducting
international trade is significantly
more challenging but even worse for
Africa's landlock countries is the fact
that they have even fewer Geographic
means to reach the sea for trade than
the landlocked countries on other
continents do in Europe when excluding
micro states there are 10 landlock
countries present on the continent but
most of them still have natural means to
reach the sea in order to conduct
Maritime International Trade Switzerland
has the navigable length of the Ryan
River Austria Slovakia Hungary Serbia
and mova all have the navigable length
of the danu river czechia has the
navigable length of the vava tributary
that connects to the navigable elb river
while Bellis maintains a navigable link
to the ocean through the daepa river the
only two non- microstate landlock
countries in Europe that do not have a
navigable link out to the ocean are
North Macedonia and coo but even these
two landlock countries are significantly
closer to the Ocean than many of the
landlocked countries in Africa are in
extremely sharp contrast to the
landlocked states of Europe not a single
one of Africa's 16 landlock countries
maintain a year round naturally
navigable link to the global ocean
meaning that all of their trade with the
outside world must be conducted over
great distances by less efficient and
more costly land-based or air-based
Transportation instead and unfortunately
for Africa's landlocked countries the
continent's land-based infrastructure
for carrying out trade is also the most
minimal of any of Earth's inhabited
continents and what little does exist is
generally either not fully developed or
are extremely old leftover Rail lines
from the colonial era that have largely
fallen into disrepair this is a map of
all the current existing Railways across
the African continent today and I
believe that this map helps explain a
lot of the geographic barriers to trade
in Africa in the modern world many
landlock countries in Africa do not have
a single railroad at all that connects
themselves to the global ocean such as
deer Chad the Central African Republic
and Burundi but large stretches of the
interior of Africa in countries like
Mali morania South Sudan the Republic of
the Congo and the DRC are also located
hundreds of kilometers away from the
nearest rail line and many countries are
extremely over dependent on just a
single country for their rail access to
the Sea South Sudan relies on just a
single railroad that connects through
Sudan in order to reach the sea Ethiopia
the most populous landlocked country in
the world to 126 million people relies
on just a single railroad that connects
through jibuti in order to reach the sea
Rwanda relies entirely on the railways
of Tanzania Malawi relies entirely on
the railways of mosm Beek mly relies
entirely on the railroad that runs
through Sagal and Bina vau relies
through Ivory Coast presenting all of
these landlock countries with a single
point of critical failure they can shut
down their rail access to the sea with
no navigable waterways to to fall back
on moreover most of Africa's countries
are not connected with one another by
Rail and there's no continent-wide
unified System since most of the
continent's railways were constructed
back during the colonial era by their
European overlords who built nearly all
of them with the extraction of resources
in mind instead of any benefits for the
people in mind the densest concentration
of Railways on the continent today can
be found in South Africa which helps to
explain a large part of South Africa's
outsized influence on the continent and
relatively more powerful economy South
Africa may not have any navigable Rivers
out to the sea but its dense rail
network extending out from its ports
connects to nearby countries like
Namibia lzo eswatini batswana Zimbabwe
Zambia and the DRC which enables them to
export and import products through South
African Maritime ports and grants them
an ability that nature and its rivers
had denied the continent building
Railways in Africa from the coast into
the interior both in the past and in the
the present are also just difficult
because again of the nature of Africa's
sharp changes in elevation almost
immediately from the coast as just one
of many examples here the railroad that
connects the Porta jouti to the capital
of Ethiopia Adis Ababa Rises more than
600 m in elevation across only the first
100 km of the route and then it sharply
Rises by a whopping
1,400 m in elevation during the final
300 km of the route virtually all
Railways and all highways that are built
in Africa connecting the coast to the
interior must contend with these sharp
and immediate Rises and elevations
straight from the coasts which add to
their costs and complexities in
comparison to other continents the
countries of subsaharan Africa therefore
face more barriers to international
trade and therefore to the ability to
generate capital and wealth than on any
other continent in the world in
isolation any one of these problems
would be a huge barrier to a country's
ability to conduct trade but in
combination they have all worked
together to handicap the African
continent's ability to facilitate trade
Commerce and connections with the
outside world for all of human history
right up until the present day in this
view Africa's overwhelming poverty in
the modern world and throughout history
is hardly a surprising outcome but there
is perhaps no other country on the
continent today that has been as
thoroughly cursed by both geography and
by history as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the DRC to put it simply
the DRC should not really exist and only
does so because of the legacy of brutal
Belgian colonialism that pillaged the
country's resources and brutalized its
people for nearly a century it is the
second largest country in Africa in
terms of land and is home to roughly 110
million people today the country is
larger than France Spain and Germany all
combined encompasses the second largest
rainforest in the world and more than
200 different ethnic groups coexist
within its borders who speak several
hundred different languages and that's
only the beginning of the drc's issues
in 2022 the DRC was ranked 180th out of
the 193 UN member states by its human
development index score the 14th lowest
score in the world and the lowest score
for any large country with a population
of more than 50 million people as of
2024 more the nominal GDP per capita in
the DRC is just
$72 per person per year the 11th lowest
measured in the entire world and a mere
5% of the same annual product created by
the average global Citizen and this is
despite the fact that the DRC is also
one of the most materially wealthy
countries in the entire world with an
enormous mineral reserves of cobalt
colan copper gold diamonds and lithium
that in 20230 were estimated to be worth
approximately $24 trillion at the market
prices of the time a very large part of
the drz's current and historical poverty
and its lack of development is due to
the Belgian Colonial period and the
previous slave trade before that and the
lasting legacies that have lingered from
those periods in addition though another
large part of the drc's poverty is
simply due to the country's cripplingly
bad natural geography that the Belgian
and European border drawers left them
with to prevent most of the people who
live there from being able to actually
conduct any kind of meaningful trade
first of all the DRC is very nearly
landlocked save for just a very narrow
sliver of land here along the mouth of
the Congo River the Congo River itself
is the defining geographic feature of
the country from a transportation and
trade perspective and the entire reason
why the DRC was created in the first
place the Congo is the ninth longest
river in the world and the longest river
in Africa after the Nile but length
isn't everything in terms of water
discharge volume the Congo is the third
largest river in the world followed only
by the Ganges and the Amazon Rivers it
is also the deepest measured river in
the world with depths at some points
plunging as deep as 220 M deep enough
that you could dip the Eiffel Tower into
the river and only the top 30% of it
would stick out above it the amount of
water that flows through the Congo River
is Absolut absolutely enormous and
that's important to understand because
it directly correlates to the Congo's
usability as a navigable trade in
transportation artery from the river's
mouth on the Atlantic Ocean it is only
navigable to ships just 160 km Upstream
into the interior at the location of the
city and Port of matadi which was
founded in that precise location as a
result from there an absolutely enormous
series of dozens of violent Rapids and
cataracts extend for another 290 km
Upstream to the location of the malbo
pool a wide and calm Basin of the river
which has always blocked and prevented
the ability of ships to travel between
the interior of the Congo and the ocean
undermining the Congo River's ability to
serve as a maritime trade artery the
same way that the Mississippi does in
America the Ry or the danu do in Europe
or the Ying sea does in China and the
worst part from a historical perspective
is that Beyond these series of rap and
cataracts there is a vast network of the
Congo River and its tributaries that are
very navigable for literally thousands
of colomet deep into the Congo's
interior with the longest singular
stretch of navigability extending all
the way from the malbo pool towards
another series of Rapids here called The
boyoma Falls a length of about 1,000
kilm worth of navigable waterway that is
about as long as the navigable section
of the Ry is in Europe but unlike the
rine it is isolated deep within the
African interior and it's impossible to
use to reach the sea when including the
many navigable sections of the Congo's
several tributaries that also extend and
converge towards the location of the
malbo pool this is by far the largest
network of Inland navigable waterways
within the entire African continent but
they are cursed by their inability to
access anywhere outside of the continent
directly and they are further cursed by
the fact that the many navigable
sections of them are not continuous and
interconnected since they're divided by
sporadic Rapids and waterfalls in order
to get around the limits of the Congo's
natural geography and to access the
Abundant Rich mineral resources deep
within the interior the Belgian Colonial
Administration and the later DRC
government post Independence developed
the so-called National route as the
primary Logistics Corridor of moving
goods and people between the country's
small Atlantic Coast in the far-flung
eastern part of the country bordering
Rwanda and Uganda and it's probably the
most fast fascinatingly convoluted
Logistics Corridor that any country has
ever established in modern history
before a railroad was built to the
connected Mata to the malbo pool Porters
were forced to carry Goods around the
Rapids between them that took nearly 3
weeks to complete by 1898 the Belgian
Colonial authorities had finally
finished building out their railroad
around the Rapids that for the first
time in history connected the 1,000 km
of the isolated navigable section of the
river in the interior to the small
smaller navigable section of the river
past matadi out to the ocean afterwards
the timec consuming Journey for moving
Goods around the Rapids that used to
take 3 weeks was reduced to only 2 days
and has been further reduced to only
around 8 hours today modern-day kinasa
the capital of the DRC was strategically
founded at the location of the malbo
pool precisely at the spot where the
river stops being navigable after about
a th000 km of navigability into the
interior towards the boyo Falls kinasa
and neighboring brazaville just across
the river at this point in the Republic
of the Congo thus evolved into the
largest Inland Water waste port on the
entire African continent and it became
the Hub of the drc's logistics Network
directly connecting the country's vast
natural resources internal navigable
waterways and the railroad connecting
around the Rapids to the global ocean
which is why kinasa eventually evolved
into literally the largest city on the
Entre ire African continent today home
to more than 17 million people from
kinasa the main stem of the Congo River
remains navigable and open to commercial
shipping all the way towards the boyoma
Falls which was where the city of
kissani was founded at from there
another railroad had to be built around
the Rapids connecting kiss andani to the
city of ubu where the Congo River
becomes the Lua laa River and once again
becomes navigable for a long stretch up
until another series of Rapids blocks
any further passage past the city of
kindu so from kindu another Railway was
built to connect the whole system to the
city of calamy on lake tanganika and
then from there boats will transport
goods and people across the lake towards
the port at UVA on the Lake's Northshore
and then finally from there a road
connects the port up to the major city
of bukavu that's on the Southshore of
lake kevu so to recap all of that
absurdity in order for the DRC to
transport Goods or people from the
Atlantic to the east of the country they
must sail from the Atlantic through the
Congo River towards matadi unload
everything onto a rail car and then
travel towards the Inland Port of kinasa
where they unload everything again onto
a riverbat and sail all the way Upstream
towards kiss andani where they have to
unload everything again onto another
rail car and travel towards yug gundu
where they then unload everything again
onto another river boat and sail further
Upstream towards the city of kindu where
they once again have to unload
everything onto yet another rail car for
transport towards the city of calamy
where they again have to unload
everything onto another boat for Transit
towards the ported UA where everything
has to be unloaded yet again onto trucks
for transportation up the highway
towards the city of bukavu that is
extremely convoluted and timec consuming
and it means that goods and people have
to be loaded and unloaded a total of
eight times just to make it across the
country by land and river and it often
still takes months worth of time to
complete even a day it is why still
today throughout a good deal of the DRC
air transportation is really the only
effective method of moving people or
things across the huge country and why
the transportation and in some cases the
smuggling of high value minerals that
pack a lot of value into a relatively
small and lightweight space are taken
out of the country primarily by aircraft
instead the ex extremely challenging
logistical transportation Corridor
between the west and the east of the
country is also a large part of why the
central DRC government is only able to
maintain a very tenuous control and
influence over its easternmost
territories closer to the borders with
Rwanda Uganda and why this part of the
Eastern DRC is effectively a black hole
on the world map where large swast of
territory are dominated by a diverse
collection of rebel and militia groups
and Warlords that is the most
underreported on major war zone in the
entire world despite the fact that this
area of the Eastern DRC was largely the
sight of the biggest and the bloodiest
war fought anywhere in the world since
World War II that potentially killed
more than 52 million people and it all
took place very recently between 1998
and 2003 and yet hardly anybody outside
of this region has ever even heard about
it that devast stating recent War
massively damaged what little existed of
the drc's infrastructure in the first
place crippling roads and highways all
across the country to the point where
the drc's two primary highways both
include large sections that to this day
are considered completely unusable
leaving behind only the complex and
convoluted National route or expensive
air travel as the only methods of
reliably moving goods and people from
the major population centers in the west
of the country to the unstable Frontier
in the East and contributing to the
drc's lack of control and influence over
the east of the country even further the
war that raged across the Eastern DRC in
the late 1990s and the early 2000s is
sometimes referred to as the African
World War because of the enormous scale
and the catastrophic loss of life that
was caused by it it is widely regarded
as the biggest conflict fought worldwide
in history since the second world war
but because of where the war was fought
it a remote difficult to access part of
the Eastern DRC where information and
knowledge of the war struggle to get out
it remains largely in tragically unknown
in the outside world but the origins of
that devastating War began with another
tragedy of catastrophic proportions that
took place in neighboring Rwanda a few
years previously in 1994 a tragedy that
you already may be at least partially
familiar with or have at least heard of
the Rwandan Genocide what happened in
Rwanda in 1994 can only be described as
one of the darkest chapters in all of
the thousands of years worth of chapters
in human history during a stretch of
only a 100 days that year the radical
government of Rwanda at the time that
was dominated by ethnic hu extremists
carried out a genocide that was largely
targeted against the country's ethnic
Tootsie minority that outpaced even the
scale of the Holocaust in Europe and
with saw as many as 800,000 people in
the country systematically and
ruthlessly killed largely by and the
horror of that genocide in Rwanda in
1994 and the events that led up to it is
perhaps the single darkest chapter in
all of modern contemporary history
worldwide and its causes were in many
ways directly related to everything you
just listen to me talk about throughout
this entire video and it's especially
related to a major subject of Africa's
geography that we didn't really explore
in this video its political geography
and artificial borders that were
established by European Colonial Powers
across the 19th and 20 centuries but
unfortunately if I made a video covering
this much darker s of Africa's political
geography and its Colonial Legacy and
their consequences including the horror
show of Rwanda in 1994 the many many
disturbing violent and controversial
details of discussing the worst genocide
in all of recent history would without a
doubt cause the video to become
demonetized and age restricted which I
actually completely agree with and think
is understandable I don't believe that
ads are anyone younger than 18 should go
along with discussing events that are
this traumatic but it also means that
YouTube's algorithm which is
incentivized to only show you videos
that have ads on them would never
promote the video to you if I uploaded
it here and there's simply no way that
you'd ever see it here as a result and
that's why instead I created yet another
fulllength companion video to this one
in my ongoing modern conflict series
that covers to the best of my ability
the entire course of events and
explanation into how the reand and
genocide took place in 1994 and what
happened during it and I uploaded it
directly to nebula where you can go and
watch it right now as I'm sure you've
probably already heard by now nebula is
the home of tons of exclusive adree
content like my entire modern conflict
series with more than 30 other
fulllength exclusive videos over there
that you can go and watch right now
covering dozens of recent major Wars and
conflicts that'll help you stay up
todate on what's going on in our world
and why from this video covering the
events of hamasa OCT October 7th attack
on Israel and this video covering all of
the Decades worth of backstory of the
Israel Palestine conflict prior to that
date to these six videos covering the
history and progression of the ongoing
Russian invasion of Ukraine to these
videos covering the history of America's
Wars against Al-Qaeda and Afghanistan
and the International Coalition against
Isis and many many more with brand new
episodes releasing every single month
and even better I also recently started
another completely new monthly series on
nebula called War room which will track
all of the latest breaking geopolitical
news developing from conflicts all
around the world and break them down
into a single easily digestible monthly
video briefing series that'll help you
stay even more up toate and informed on
what's currently happening around the
world and why the latest episode in war
room covering all of the breaking
geopolitical news and developments from
last month in October is live on nebula
for you to go and watch right now and
new episodes will be released every
single month just like the monthly new
episodes in modern conflicts of bad
meaning two new exclusive real life
floor videos on nebula that you won't
find on YouTube going out every month
going forward and what's even more you
also get access to all of the other
amazing exclusive content that's also on
nebula because the best part about this
site is that it's jointly co-owned by
all of its creators built by me and
hundreds of other independent YouTubers
and podcasters and because it's a
subscription based service we all get to
work on way bigger and higher budget
Productions over there than we could
ever afford to do on our own on YouTube
that's why there's tons of other
exclusive content that you'll find
equally fascinating from all of these
other creators over there some of which
you might already know as well and best
of all if you sign up for nebula by
clicking the button that's here on your
screen right now or by following the
link that's down below in the
description you'll receive an insane 40%
discount off of an annual subscription
which means it'll only cost you $3 a
month or $36 a year for all of this
awesome exclusive content from myself
and hundreds of other independent
creators with even more stuff getting
added every single month it's the
absolute best way to help support what
I'm doing here on real life lore and as
always thank you so much for watching